# 5.1.5 Grammar Notation

# 5.1.5.1 Terminal Symbols

In the ECMAScript grammars, some terminal symbols are shown in `fixed-width` font. These are to appear in a source text exactly as written. All terminal symbol code points specified in this way are to be understood as the appropriate Unicode code points from the Basic Latin block, as opposed to any similar-looking code points from other Unicode ranges. A code point in a terminal symbol cannot be expressed by a `\` [UnicodeEscapeSequence](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#prod-UnicodeEscapeSequence).

In grammars whose terminal symbols are individual Unicode code points (i.e., the lexical, RegExp, and numeric string grammars), a contiguous run of multiple fixed-width code points appearing in a production is a simple shorthand for the same sequence of code points, written as standalone terminal symbols.

For example, the production:

```haxe
HexIntegerLiteral :: 0x HexDigits
```

is a shorthand for:

```haxe
HexIntegerLiteral :: 0 x HexDigits
```

In contrast, in the syntactic grammar, a contiguous run of fixed-width code points is a single terminal symbol.

Terminal symbols come in two other forms:

- In the lexical and `RegExp` grammars, Unicode code points without a conventional printed representation are instead shown in the form `"<ABBREV>"` where "ABBREV" is a mnemonic for the code point or set of code points. These forms are defined in [Unicode Format-Control Characters](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-unicode-format-control-characters), [White Space](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-white-space), and [Line Terminators](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-line-terminators).
- In the syntactic grammar, certain terminal symbols (e.g. [IdentifierName](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#prod-IdentifierName) and [RegularExpressionLiteral](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#prod-RegularExpressionLiteral)) are shown in italics, as they refer to the nonterminals of the same name in the lexical grammar.

# 5.1.5.2 Nonterminal Symbols and Productions

Nonterminal symbols are shown in *italic* type. The definition of a nonterminal (also called a “production”) is introduced by the name of the nonterminal being defined followed by one or more colons. (The number of colons indicates to which grammar the production belongs.) One or more alternative right-hand sides for the nonterminal then follow on succeeding lines. For example, the syntactic definition:

```haxe
WhileStatement : 
    while ( Expression ) Statement
```

states that the nonterminal `WhileStatement` represents the token `while`, followed by a left parenthesis token, followed by an `Expression`, followed by a right parenthesis token, followed by a `Statement`. The occurrences of `Expression` and `Statement` are themselves nonterminals. As another example, the syntactic definition:

```haxe
ArgumentList :
    AssignmentExpression 
    ArgumentList , AssignmentExpression
```

states that an `ArgumentList` may represent either a single `AssignmentExpression` or an `ArgumentList`, followed by a comma, followed by an `AssignmentExpression`. This definition of `ArgumentList` is recursive, that is, it is defined in terms of itself. The result is that an `ArgumentList` may contain any positive number of arguments, separated by commas, where each argument expression is an `AssignmentExpression`. Such recursive definitions of nonterminals are common.

# 5.1.5.3 Optional Symbols

The subscripted suffix “opt”, which may appear after a terminal or nonterminal, indicates an optional symbol. The alternative containing the optional symbol actually specifies two right-hand sides, one that omits the optional element and one that includes it. This means that:

```haxe
VariableDeclaration :
	BindingIdentifier Initializer_opt
```

is a convenient abbreviation for:

```haxe
VariableDeclaration :
	BindingIdentifier
	BindingIdentifier Initializer
```

and that:

```haxe
ForStatement :
    for ( LexicalDeclaration Expression_opt ; Expression_opt ) Statement
```

is a convenient abbreviation for:

```haxe
ForStatement :
    for ( LexicalDeclaration ; Expression_opt ) Statement
    for ( LexicalDeclaration Expression ; Expression_opt ) Statement
```

which in turn is an abbreviation for:

```haxe
ForStatement :
    for ( LexicalDeclaration ; ) Statement
    for ( LexicalDeclaration ; Expression ) Statement
    for ( LexicalDeclaration Expression ; ) Statement
    for ( LexicalDeclaration Expression ; Expression ) Statement
```

so, in this example, the nonterminal `ForStatement` actually has four alternative right-hand sides.

# 5.1.5.4 Grammatical Parameters

A production may be parameterized by a subscripted annotation of the form “[parameters]”, which may appear as a suffix to the nonterminal symbol defined by the production. “parameters” may be either a single name or a comma separated list of names. A parameterized production is shorthand for a set of productions defining all combinations of the parameter names, preceded by an underscore, appended to the parameterized nonterminal symbol. This means that:

```haxe
StatementList[Return] :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

is a convenient abbreviation for:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
StatementList_Return :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

and that:

```haxe
StatementList[Return, In] :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

is an abbreviation for:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
StatementList_Return :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
StatementList_In :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
StatementList_Return_In :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

Multiple parameters produce a combinatory number of productions, not all of which are necessarily referenced in a complete grammar.

References to nonterminals on the right-hand side of a production can also be parameterized. For example:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement[+In]
```

is equivalent to saying:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement_In
```

and:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement[~In]
```

is equivalent to:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

A nonterminal reference may have both a parameter list and an “opt” suffix. For example:

```haxe
VariableDeclaration :
    BindingIdentifier Initializer[+In]_opt
```

is an abbreviation for:

```haxe
VariableDeclaration :
    BindingIdentifier
    BindingIdentifier Initializer_In
```

Prefixing a parameter name with “?” on a right-hand side nonterminal reference makes that parameter value dependent upon the occurrence of the parameter name on the reference to the current production's left-hand side symbol. For example:

```haxe
VariableDeclaration[In] :
    BindingIdentifier Initializer[?In]
```

is an abbreviation for:

```haxe
VariableDeclaration :
    BindingIdentifier Initializer
VariableDeclaration_In :
    BindingIdentifier Initializer_In
```

If a right-hand side alternative is prefixed with “[+parameter]” that alternative is only available if the named parameter was used in referencing the production's nonterminal symbol. If a right-hand side alternative is prefixed with “[~parameter]” that alternative is only available if the named parameter was *not* used in referencing the production's nonterminal symbol. This means that:

```haxe
StatementList[Return] :
    [+Return] ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

is an abbreviation for:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ExpressionStatement
StatementList_Return :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

and that:

```haxe
StatementList[Return] :
    [~Return] ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
```

is an abbreviation for:

```haxe
StatementList :
    ReturnStatement
    ExpressionStatement
StatementList_Return :
    ExpressionStatement
```

# 5.1.5.5 one of

When the words “**one of**” follow the colon(s) in a grammar definition, they signify that each of the terminal symbols on the following line or lines is an alternative definition. For example, the lexical grammar for ECMAScript contains the production:

```haxe
NonZeroDigit :: one of
    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
```

which is merely a convenient abbreviation for:

```haxe
NonZeroDigit ::
    1
    2
    3
    4
    5
    6
    7
    8
    9
```

# 5.1.5.6 [empty]

If the phrase “[empty]” appears as the right-hand side of a production, it indicates that the production's right-hand side contains no terminals or nonterminals.

# 5.1.5.7 Lookahead Restrictions

If the phrase “[lookahead = seq]” appears in the right-hand side of a production, it indicates that the production may only be used if the token sequence seq is a prefix of the immediately following input token sequence. Similarly, “[lookahead ∈ set]”, where set is a [finite](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#finite) non-empty set of token sequences, indicates that the production may only be used if some element of set is a prefix of the immediately following token sequence. For convenience, the set can also be written as a nonterminal, in which case it represents the set of all token sequences to which that nonterminal could expand. It is considered an editorial error if the nonterminal could expand to infinitely many distinct token sequences.

These conditions may be negated. “[lookahead ≠ seq]” indicates that the containing production may only be used if seq is *not* a prefix of the immediately following input token sequence, and “[lookahead ∉ set]” indicates that the production may only be used if *no* element of set is a prefix of the immediately following token sequence.

As an example, given the definitions:

```haxe
DecimalDigit :: one of
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
DecimalDigits ::
    DecimalDigit
    DecimalDigits DecimalDigit
```

the definition:

```haxe
LookaheadExample ::
    n [lookahead ∉ { 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 }] DecimalDigits
    DecimalDigit [lookahead ∉ DecimalDigit]
```

matches either the letter `n` followed by one or more decimal digits the first of which is even, or a decimal digit not followed by another decimal digit.

Note that when these phrases are used in the syntactic grammar, it may not be possible to unambiguously identify the immediately following token sequence because determining later tokens requires knowing which lexical [goal symbol](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-context-free-grammars) to use at later positions. As such, when these are used in the syntactic grammar, it is considered an editorial error for a token sequence seq to appear in a lookahead restriction (including as part of a set of sequences) if the choices of lexical [goal symbols](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-context-free-grammars) to use could change whether or not seq would be a prefix of the resulting token sequence.

# 5.1.5.8 [no LineTerminator here]

If the phrase “[no LineTerminator here]” appears in the right-hand side of a production of the syntactic grammar, it indicates that the production is *a restricted production*: it may not be used if a LineTerminator occurs in the input stream at the indicated position. For example, the production:

```haxe
ThrowStatement :
    throw [no LineTerminator here] Expression ;
```

indicates that the production may not be used if a `LineTerminator` occurs in the script between the `throw` token and the `Expression`.

Unless the presence of a `LineTerminator` is forbidden by a restricted production, any number of occurrences of `LineTerminator` may appear between any two consecutive tokens in the stream of input elements without affecting the syntactic acceptability of the script.

# 5.1.5.9 but not

The right-hand side of a production may specify that certain expansions are not permitted by using the phrase “**but not**” and then indicating the expansions to be excluded. For example, the production:

```haxe
Identifier ::
    IdentifierName but not ReservedWord
```

means that the nonterminal `Identifier` may be replaced by any sequence of code points that could replace `IdentifierName` provided that the same sequence of code points could not replace `ReservedWord`.

